Snow Golems are the game's first "utility mobs," which Notch defines as any player-created mob.[1] They are by nature friendly to their creator. Snow Golems are created using Pumpkins and Snow Blocks, and will throw snowballs at enemy mobs. In cold biomes, they will not melt even when lava or fire is near them. As Snow Golems move, they leave a trail of snow on the ground, except in the Nether.[2][3] Snow Golems will not leave snow over blocks such as Redstone dust or torches, but they will wreck farmland by walking on it, and then leave snow over the resulting dirt. If a Snow Golem walks over a mushroom, the mushroom will be destroyed and dropped as an item. Once killed, the Snow Golem will drop approximately 10 snowballs. 
To create a Snow Golem, the player must vertically stack two Snow Blocks on the ground and then place a Pumpkin on top of them. Snow Golems are not made on the Crafting Table. They are only created when the pumpkin is placed last. Pistons cannot create Snow Golems because they cannot push pumpkin blocks. Snow Golems can also be created using a Jack-O-Lantern, although there is no visual difference. Endermen are also capable of creating Snow Golems by placing the necessary blocks, although this is an extremely rare event because they do not do so purposefully.
Farming: Because Snow Golems leave a constant trail of snow as they move, it is possible to farm that snow. However, due to their behavior of attacking hostile mobs, it would be wise to ensure the Snow Golem is in an enclosed, safe place before beginning. The simplest method is to create a 1x1 hole that is 2 blocks deep, and to put both the player and the Snow Golem in. Then the player would look straight down and farm the snow that is produced. This creates an infinite amount of snow in the shortest time possible, because the instant the snow breaks, another one spawns in its place. 
It is also possible to create a generator by placing 2 blocks of snow on a stone and then surrounding the top block with any resource. Once this is done, place a pumpkin on top and start digging at the corner of the block where the snow is being generated. Holding down the mouse is the fastest way to gather. 
Snow is not created on Desert nor warm Plains Biomes
Defense: A horde of Snow Golems kept between two lines of fence provides a wall that keeps mobs at a distance. The Snow Golems can still be killed by Skeletons. A 1x1x2 area can be used to store a horde of Snow Golems. In an emergency, the Snow Golems can be released to push back approaching enemies. 
Snow Golems may also be placed into Guard Towers, shielding them from damage. To create such a guard tower, make a small 3x3, 1-4 block high tower. Surround the top with fencing and create a Snow Golem in the center. 
Snow Golems may also be suspended atop lava pits to lure mobs into them, passively protecting an area. This method can also prevent mobs from hiding around the player's home. 
Luring: Snow Golems can also be used to lure hostile mobs into traps. This can create a better flow of mob drops for the player to collect, speeding up mob harvesting. To do this, fence Snow Golems in just beyond the entrance of a trap. Mobs will then wander in as they attempt to attack the Snow Golems. 
A single Snow Golem kept between four fences under a 3x3 two block high ceiling can be used to distract attacking Endermen. Once the Enderman is within reach of the Snow Golem, the Snow Golem will pelt it with snowballs. The Endermen will stop attacking the player, but will be unable to reach the Snow Golem due to the ceiling. A moat filled with lava or water around the Snow Golem enclosure can be used to kill the Endermen instead of simply distracting them. 
Behavior: Snow Golems throw snowballs at hostile mobs, provoking them. This gives them an almost suicidal nature, as the thrown snowballs do not do significant damage, except to Blazes. Snow Golems attract enemies, making them useful for luring enemies into traps. They are also capable of drawing enemies away from the player. In Beta 1.9 Pre-release, Snow Golems sometimes forget to attack monsters. Snow Golems have good pathing skills, and will not jump off cliffs or into lava. They will attempt to move towards hostile mobs, and, as of 1.0.0, will even open and go through doors to reach them.
History: Snow Golems (previously known as Snowmen) were first mentioned by Notch on September 21, 2011, and were slated to appear in Beta 1.9. 
In The Story of Mojang, Notch briefly mentioned adding "snowmen that throw snowballs." 
Notch originally planned to call this mob Snowmen. However, very soon after revealing the name, Reddit user Cuttleman stated he would call them Snow Golems, a name Notch approved of and made official.[
Bugs: Snow Golems do not leave snow trails in Mushroom Biomes. 
In SMP, Snow Golems do not make sounds when throwing snowballs. 
Snow Golems are not hostile towards Enderdragons. 
Snow Golems do not produce snow underneath them when near Bedrock. 
Snow Golems can and will jump over fences given the chance, thus spreading snow everywhere.
Trivia: Snow Golems do not de-spawn if the player leaves the area. 
Snow Golems will not spawn snow on glass. 
A few hundred Snow Golems can in fact kill mobs, but will understandably take quite a while and result in heavy losses. 
Snow Golems are the second mob the player can cause to spawn, the first being Chickens spawning from eggs thrown by the player. 
Four Snow Golems throw snowballs quickly enough to continuously push a Zombie back. 
Snow Golems are not affected by fall damage. 
Snow Golems wear their Pumpkin as a hat. Their actual Snowman-type head is hidden beneath it. 
If a Snow Golem is lit on fire, it will speed up and move toward a water source. 
Snow Golems do not attack aggressive wolves even if they attack the player. 
Snow Golems will attack Zombie Pigmen regardless of whether or not they attacked the player, thus making the whole pack attack them. 
Snow Golems sometimes survive creeper explosions. 
The throwing sound is actually the Bow firing sound, even though Snowballs have their own throwing sound. 
Snow Golems do not leave snow trails in the Nether, but do leave them in The End. 
If a Snow Golem is trapped somewhere and there is an exit, the Snow Golem will try to escape. 
Since the full release (1.0), Snow Golems no longer have the ability to breed. This is possibly due to the fact the Snow Golems attack each other when in love mode. 
Snow Golems can only be crafted by placing a pumpkin on top of two snow blocks; placing the pumpkin then snow underneath will produce no snow golem. 
If trapped underwater, Snow Golems can drown. 
If the player occupies the same space as a Snow Golem, the Snow Golem's Pumpkin helmet will be seen through, revealing their face. 
Snow Golems do not create ice when moving onto a water block. 
Snow Golems distract hostile mobs completely, allowing the player to walk up and easily kill them. 
The amount of Snowballs dropped when a Snow Golem dies, 10-15, is more than what was needed to create it, 8. 