The spider is a bug-like monster and also is a mob that is neutral in sufficient light levels and hostile towards the player at night and in dark, shadowy areas. They are able to see the player through solid blocks. A spider measures 2 x 2 x 1 blocks, with very dark brown skin and red eyes that glow eerily in the dark. Because of their dimensions, spiders cannot enter 1-block wide spaces that zombies, skeletons, and creepers can, but it can crawl into 1-block high gaps (as long as they are 2 or more blocks wide). Spiders' distinctive hissing noises can alert a player to their presence - creepers make a similar, much shorter noise when damaged. Spiders are easier to hit with arrows due to their size, but can quickly catch up to the player with their leaping (they can cover 2 - 3 blocks in a bound) and wall-climbing abilities. Spiders will often jump around when attacking, making them a moving target and harder to hit. When hunting, spiders move at a pace slightly slower than the player's walking speed. Unlike zombies and skeletons, spiders will not catch fire in daylight. 
There is a 1% chance that a spider will spawn with a skeleton on its back, forming the dreaded Spider Jockey. The skeleton's ability to fire arrows combined with the speed, leaping, and wall-climbing of the spider makes this a very dangerous opponent. 
In the 1.8 update, there is a new, superior, blue variety called Cave Spiders which spawn in Abandoned Mine Shafts and are able to poison their targets. 
Uses: Spiders are the main sources of string, which is a critical ingredient of bows and fishing rods as well as for (white) wool (simply shearing a sheep is a lot more effective, as using string to make wool is a waste, although if you kill enough spiders and you cannot find sheep, string can be very effective for wool because it only takes 4). Each spider drops 0 - 2 pieces of string upon death. As of 1.9 pre-release 2, they also drop spider eyes used to make certain potions. However, they will only drop spider eyes when directly killed by the player. 
Dungeons that contain a spider monster spawner can be fitted with cactus blocks so the player can harvest spider string. Because spiders are two blocks wide, they cannot pass through a one-block gap between two cactus blocks (or a cactus and a wall) and will press themselves to death against a cactus trying to chase the player. Dungeon doorways can also be modified to trap spiders inside, allowing the player to kill them and obtain spider eyes and experience orbs, as well as the string. 
Behavior: Spiders are hostile so long as the light level immediately around them is 9 or less. If they are found in an area with a higher light level, they won't attack unless a player attacks first. Hostile spiders will continue to chase the player even if they are exposed to daytime or other well-lit locations. Conversely, a spider won't become hostile around a player when roaming in daylight, but if it wanders into a moderately shaded area (i.e. under a tree or rocky overhang) it will turn hostile and remain that way. If a spider sustains damage from a source other than the player, such as falling, its hostility will be reset, so that if it is in a well-lit area, it will not be hostile towards the player. 
Spiders can draw line of sight through solid objects, so they will pursue the player even when completely cut off from them, so long as they are within the standard aggressive mob's 16 block search radius. The spider will then approach as close as possible and ambush the player even if it subsequently becomes light. Spiders on the surface can also track a player in a cave or tunnel if there is a clear path above the player they can follow and vice versa. 
Spiders can climb up over walls and other obstacles as if all blocks had ladders on them. However spiders are careless climbers and will often fall off other blocks, (taking fall damage,) while in pursuit of the player. Spiders cannot climb soul sand covered with vines. 
Combat: Since they can pounce and move almost as fast as the player can when hunting at night or aggravated, spiders should never be underestimated. As the only naturally occurring source of string apart from dungeon chests and cobwebs in abandoned mine shafts, preparation and effort can pay off when hunting them. Wearing armor and carrying a stone or iron sword or bow is recommended. A bow is the preferred weapon, as arrows can damage a spider at a safe distance and spiders present a large and visible target due to their size and glowing eyes. When attacking a group of spiders, pick off the ones that aren't too close to others in order to avoid aggravating several at once. 
Alternatively, the player can dig a narrow trench with a depth of 2 blocks in order to be able to attack spiders safely from underneath, trapping them above the gap. This strategy has mixed results, as some players have reported spiders waiting for them to exit the trench before pouncing, a behavior possibly caused by the AI that makes the spider lose track of the player after a number of unsuccessful attacks and therefore become neutral until the player is visible. Players should also keep in mind that trench warfare leaves them vulnerable to other mobs (skeletons, zombies, and especially creepers) in the vicinity. 
When attacking or being attacked by spiders, prepared or unprepared, your first priority should be to have the high ground or if that is not possible, to at least ensure the spider does not have the high ground. When on higher ground the player can spam attack the spider preventing it from jumping and avoiding the attack while also ensuring the spider does not have a clear jump on the player, if the spider has the high ground on a player it is advisable that the player retreat to flat ground before engaging with the spider because if the spider has the high ground it will be able to jump on the players head with the extra height, causing an almost unavoidable attack and thus causing unnecessary damage. 
Defensive Measures:Like other hostile mobs, spiders are vulnerable to fire, fall damage, lava, and are injured by contact with cacti blocks. They can be set on fire with a flint and steel in the day time, taking damage but remaining neutral towards the player. Surface spider populations can be controlled if the player sleeps regularly in a bed at dusk, since spiders will spawn during the night if given the chance to do so. When travelling at night, the player is advised to watch for active spiders' glowing red eyes in the darkness. 
Construction Safeguards: Spiders can climb any vertical solid surface. One way to deal with this is to make sure the roof is accessible through only a 1x1 hole (or a 1x2 high doorway with or without a door, although other hostile mobs will be able to fit through this gap) that spiders cannot crawl into. Alternatively, a lip or overhang on a wall will stop them from breaching it. The player can alternate an overhang every other block to conserve materials, as spiders are 2 blocks wide and cannot climb walls sideways. A third deterrent to spiders is to place ladders on a wall 4 blocks above the ground level, as the edges of the ladders will block the spiders' climbing. For more tips on spider-proofing, please consult this guide.
History: The spider was the second mob added to Minecraft in Survival Test. Spiders were originally brown in early development. They did not jump as far (compared to their range in the Beta update) and killing them gave the player 105 points. In Indev, spiders began to drop 0 - 2 pieces of string upon death. 
In the Beta 1.2 update, Spiders were given the ability to climb vertical walls made of any block and could "see" the player through solid blocks to track them down (creepers used to have this ability before it was transferred to the spiders). As of Beta 1.4, spiders will not trample crops,[1] nor will they make step sounds (if they do, they will be much quieter).[2] 
As of Beta 1.5, a cobweb block has been added to the game files. Cobwebs did not naturally occur at the time, but they were fully functional if hacked into the game. As of Beta 1.8, cobwebs are generated in Abandoned Mine Shafts. 
Trivia: If a player throws an egg at a docile spider and hits, the spider will stay neutral. 
Sometimes spiders can be found inside blocks. Once the block is removed or destroyed the spider will attack regardless of whether or not it was hit in the process. 
Causing a spider to take fall damage or damage from a cactus after attacking it during the day causes it to become neutral again. 
Sometimes after attacking a spider in sunlight, the spider will cease attacking the player; this is presumably the high light levels turning the spider neutral. 
Spiders slow down when climbing vertical surfaces, making it easier for a player to outrun them around steep mountains and cliffs. 
Because the code controlling the spider's facing and jumping are not linked, it is possible for a spider to jump sideways or backwards if it was previously attacking the player, halted because it could not find a way to them, started looking in other directions, and then became capable of attacking the player again. 
Spiders will not drop onto fences. If a spider climbs over the fence and on top of a house is surrounded by fences, the spider will be trapped on the roof. 
Spiders require an area at least 3 blocks wide by 3 blocks long and two blocks tall for spawning. The top block in this arrangement however can be filled with a transparent block such as glass. 
They appear to be based on real life jumping spiders due to their eye pattern, the fact that they pounce to attack, and that they become neutral in daylight, since they're nocturnal (a mistake being that most jumping spiders hunt in the day). 
Spiders can travel through a space that is 1½ blocks wide. This can happen when glass panes are part of a wall composed mostly of solid blocks. If a glass pane on the end of a line of panes is removed, spiders can crawl through the gap that is created. 
When you set fire to a spider, it will be surrounded by a giant fireball 
Due to Spiders having a separate 'spider_eyes' file (this includes Endermen) they can be seen bright red as if constantly being hurt as if you were inside lava. 
Spiders have a lower chance than other mobs to make a footstep noise when they walk on a block. However, since they are wider, they touch more blocks at once, which causes about the same amount of footstep sounds as any other mob. 
Spiders are unaffected by Splash Potions of Poison. 
When below level 28 (the level that will cause fog to appear underground) spiders that are approximately 30 blocks away will appear pure white.
