Mooshrooms are cow-like mobs that spawn in the Mushroom Biome. They are covered with red mushroom growths and have 2 mushrooms on their body and one on their head. 
Uses: Mooshrooms can be sheared for 2-5 red mushrooms, which turns them back into normal cows. If killed, they drop leather and raw beef like normal cows do. Mooshrooms can be milked with a bucket like a normal cow, and can be "milked" with an empty bowl to obtain a bowl of Mushroom Stew. 
Behavior: Mooshrooms roam the Overworld Mushroom biome and occasionally other biomes in herds of 4—8. Mooshrooms make no attempt to stay out of water, and will bob up and down to stay afloat. They are extremely aware of cliffs, and will not jump off on purpose unless pushed or attacked. Upon reloading a map a Mooshroom has a chance to respawn on the other side of a fence to which it started.
Breeding: All passive mobs (Excluding squids and villagers) can be bred using Wheat. Breeding a mooshroom with another mooshroom will make a baby mooshroom, but breeding a regular cow with a mooshroom may make a regular cow or a mooshroom, which is chosen randomly. 
Bugs: On SMP when a Mooshroom is sheared, a server-side cow spawns, as well as a client-side cow that spawns for the player who sheared the Mooshroom.[1] The same thing also happens to the dropped resources as a result of shearing. 
As of 1.9 Pre-release 5, in SMP when a baby mooshroom is sheared, it turns into two normal cows and the two parent mooshrooms stop following them. 
When a Mooshroom is sheared after it has already bred once, it can be breed again immediately. 
Mooshrooms may spawn in non-mushroom biomes as well. It is currently unknown whether this is a bug or not. 
In 1.0.0, right clicking on a Mooshroom with more than one bowl equipped will turn the whole stack into just one bowl of Mushroom Stew. 
Trivia: The Mooshroom's name is a portmanteau of "moo," the sound Cows make, and "mushroom." 
In the Beta 1.9 Pre-release mobs folder in the minecraft.jar, Mooshroom's are referred to as redcows, most likely because their texture is mainly a red color shift of the cow texture. Also, Mooshrooms are referred to as mushroomcows as its entity ID. 
When a Mooshroom transforms into a normal Cow by shearing, it emits smoke particles. 
There are only red mushrooms on mooshrooms, not brown ones. 
When sheared, mooshrooms drop red mushrooms and not brown mushrooms but one can "milk" mooshroom with a bowl to obtain mushroom stew. (Which needs both red mushroom and brown mushrooms.) 
Mooshrooms are the most resourceful mob in Minecraft: Mooshrooms can be "milked" with a bowl for mushroom stew and also can be milked with a Bucket for Milk; shearing them drops 2-5 red mushrooms, which changes them back into a normal cow that can be milked with a bucket; the Milk is used for making cake; and when you kill the cow it can drop 1-3 pieces of raw beef and 0-2 pieces of leather. This is a total of at least 7/5 items that can be directly or indirectly obtained from Mooshrooms/Cows respectively. 
If you breed a mooshroom with a normal cow, either a normal baby cow will be born or a baby mooshroom will be born. 