A skeleton is a fairly fast-paced enemy that will shoot arrows at the player and any mobs that attacks it. Like zombies, skeletons spawn in dimly lit areas, and will burn in daylight (when the sun is 15 degrees or greater above the ground) unless they are swimming in water or are standing in the shade. For example, underneath a tree, outcropping of a mountain or player-built structure. 
Uses: skeletons are the sole source of bones (and bone meal) and can also drop fully formed arrows. Each skeleton will drop 0 - 2 bones and/or 0 - 2 arrows upon death. Although skeletons will fire arrows into walls and the ground, the player cannot pick up and re-use these arrows. Because of its valuable drops, skeleton dungeons are well sought-out for mob grinding purposes. 
Creepers must be killed by a skeleton's arrow in order to drop a Music Disc.
Behavior: The presence of a skeleton is identifiable by the soft rattling sound of its bones. It will walk and jump around aimlessly until it spots the player. At that point, it will start firing arrows in the player's direction with moderate accuracy, aiming at head level when it is at full health and at torso level when injured. When approaching a target, a skeleton will strafe to its right and bunny-hop, making itself more difficult to hit. However, these tendencies often get skeletons stuck in small alcoves and caves. 
If a skeleton's arrow hits another hostile mob, that mob will then attack the skeleton the same way it would attack the player - creepers will detonate near the skeleton after being hit. The skeleton will continue to attack the player until it is damaged by the mob. In short, mobs will always attempt to attack the last mob (including a player) that cause damage to them. Skeletons will also attack the last mob they hit with an arrow, as in, if a skeleton shot another skeleton, both skeletons will attack the other, not just one. If the player intervenes, however, they will both attack the player. 
Combat: Skeletons pose more of a threat because they have ranged attacks and will strafe, jump, and dodge when approaching the player. This can prove especially problematic if the player does not have a bow. By carefully maneuvering behind corners, skeletons can be trapped against the walls and cautiously dispatched with a sword. 
Going after skeletons while swimming is not advised, as the water will slow the player's movement down to the point of making them an easy target for the skeleton's arrows. Their arrows travel in a straight line as of 1.8, however, pre 1.8 their arrows use to travel to in a wide arc, which would sometimes causes the arrows to get stuck in the ceiling. If skeletons are in a 2 block high area, they could almost never hit you unless they were very close, or if their health was low, and they were shooting from their torso. 
As of Beta 1.9 Pre-release 5 Skeletons, Zombie Pigmen, and Zombies can be damaged by Splash Potions of healing. 
Defensive Measures: Skeletons are vulnerable to daylight (when not standing in water), lava, fire, falling, and contact with cacti. They are also able to climb ladders. Surface skeleton populations can be controlled if the player regularly sleeps in a bed at dusk, since skeletons will spawn in the dark if given the chance to. Players can keep an ear out for the clicking and xylophone-like sounds of nearby skeletons in caves and use certain corners and tight spaces to their advantage. 
If skeletons do get close to your home, the player must note that a door is not an adequate safety barrier, unless it was placed from the outside. Skeletons can shoot arrows through doors if placed from the inside and will not desist until daytime, and the player is advised to have some form of preliminary defenses to prevent a skeleton getting so close.
Construction Safeguards: Proper lighting around and inside structures is essential to preventing skeletons (and other hostile mobs) from spawning. 
History: Skeletons were a hostile mob introduced to the game in Survival Test. They spawned randomly in new Survival maps and followed players when approached, much like zombies. They fired purple arrows, appeared to fire arrows at a faster and more random rate and shot 6 arrows outward a short range in all directions when dying. Arrows fired by skeletons at that time could be picked up and used by players. Skeletons took 5 hits to kill and could appear wearing NPC armor (that gave them no additional protection) and gave 120 points when killed. 
In Alpha, skeletons would drop 0 - 2 arrows upon death. As of Alpha 1.2.0(Also known as the Halloween Update), skeletons hold a bow in their right hand. 
As of Beta 1.2, skeletons can drop 0 - 2 bones in addition to arrows. These bones can be turned into bone meal, and mixed with other ingredients to make dyes or applied to wheat and saplings to mature the crop instantly. In Beta 1.4, skeleton bones could be used to tame wolves. As of Beta 1.6.6, bone meal applied to grass blocks will grow tall grass and flowers. As of Beta 1.8, they now hold full-sized bows and their rate of fire is reduced. Their arrows however, will be shot with more force. Also as of Beta 1.8, bone meal can also be used on a mushroom to create Huge Mushrooms. 
As of Beta 1.8, a skeleton's bow is now larger and held more realistically, and they also fire arrows slightly slower. This update also fixed a bug where skeletons would fire their arrows from above their heads. 
Trivia: Skeletons cannot hit the player if they stand perfectly still and the skeleton doesn't move. 
Skeletons have the same face as zombies, but with a different color. 
Skeletons' legs have the same texture as their arms. 
If the player is under a skeleton, it will shoot itself. 
Though they have the same pose as a zombie, they will not damage the player through contact (touching). 
In terms of potential threat, this makes little difference; while skeletons cannot fire arrows as rapidly as zombies will hit, they will continue to fire their bows at the player from point-blank range. 
A skeleton in a Minecart will burn on contact with sunlight. 
Despite holding a bow, they do not drop it when they die. 
Since Beta 1.8, Skeletons hold their bows more realistically (two-handed, ready to use) than in previous versions (in one hand). 
Skeletons may spawn on top of a spider creating a "Spider Jockey" 
In Creative Mode, when a skeleton shoots an arrow at the player, the arrow bounces off and can hit the skeleton or other mobs. If it hits another hostile mob, it causes it to become hostile to the skeleton. 
Skeletons can climb up ladders, but they will not shoot the players while climbing up. They do not use ladders to their advantage, and often simply use it if it is directly in front of them while in pursuit of the player. 
In Survival Test, Skeletons shot arrows with a magenta colored shaft. This texture is currently unused but it still can be seen in arrows.png. 
A Skeleton can kill itself with its own arrows if the player stays directly above it while flying in Creative Mode. 
If a skeleton shoots itself with its own arrow, the arrow does not stick to the skeleton. 
Since Beta 1.9 pre 5, a splash potion of fire resistance can be used to spare skeletons from burning to death in the sun. 
A skeleton hit by a splash potion of harming will gain health, however, when it is hit by a splash potion of healing it will lose health. It is also unaffected by potions of regeneration and poison. This is because skeletons are undead. 
The only way to obtain a music disc, not counting a chest found in a dungeon or mine, is for a skeleton to kill a creeper who will then drop one. 